Oh, the tape is running.
You've only made one comment on that, which sort of answered one of my
questions, which, is it pronounced the Mri? Mri, yes. Mri. If you've
modeled them in any cultures, you've already answered that one.
I guess what I'll ask you is, what do you, as their creator or Duncan, the human
who lives with them, what do you admire about them? I think that, for one thing,
about them, Mri, I think I admire their steadfastness,
their ability to face time itself with tranquility in the sense that they can
take the long view, which is a thing that is absolutely necessary in my mind for
civilized survival. Mind, I don't say just survival, but civilized survival. Is
there ability to look down the centuries and see consequences?
The Mri sense of time is a very strange thing. Mri always lives now. And
that now is a composite of the past. current events and the future
simultaneously. They do not view time as the modern American does, which is more
or less a set of beads on the string that we can snip off any tail of the string
that seems inconvenient to us. The reconcept of the universe is holistic.
and their ability to perceive that all of time impacts on every moment that they
live I think is one of the things that I most enjoy about that species. What
about Duncan? Why does he choose to give up his, in a sense, give up his
humanity and become one of them? Well, for the character of Duncan himself, you
will recall that he has no past. He was born in the war probably an orphan very
early in life, transferred to a state nursery and brought up to fight,
essentially to pay for his existence by becoming a soldier in a war that had
gone on much longer than made sense for anyone. When he encountered the Mri,
he is a very simple man in many ways. He's highly educated in his narrow field
of specialization. The state saw to that. But when he encounters the Mri, he
cannot sympathize with the diplomats or with anything else that's going on. but
what he considered to be another soldier from his viewpoint with a soldier's
morality, he could comprehend and respect that. That respect then led him to a
deeper understanding of the people. To me one of the more pathetic things in the
story is Duncan himself who was attacking the Regal Library, attempting, a
completely uneducated man in many ways, attempting to understand the culture
that he has just contributed to destroy. And he becomes obsessed with it. He
finally conceives it as a moral responsibility of his own and thereby falls into
a trap because his humanity, his sense of moral responsibility, his feeling of
blame for what has happened leads him to attempt to save these people. And once
he has done that, he discovers that if he remains what he is, namely human, that
will as effectively destroy them as any bomb any attack could do so his final
sacrifice in a in a sort of a redemptive sense is that um he finally agrees that
he will no longer attempt to be human he begins to try to be something else Even
in that, there is a considerable hazard. Because if the transition is not
complete, he may end up by contaminating the culture, which to the Mri and
their way of life is a very, very serious thing. But it is a voluntary and
conscious decision
that effectively it is personal suicide. And he takes it because he feels
responsible for what has happened. Okay. I think it was in the second book of
the series, there was a particular episode that, I guess of all your writing,
this, I think, got to me the most. Is the game called Shonai? Shonai. Shonai.
When they're on the ship making the jumps back to the Mri Home World, and I
guess it's Niun is teaching him the Shonai game. I was fascinated enough about
that to wonder if there was any model behind that particular game and its
purpose or its intention.
I suppose that if I thought very far back into my childhood, I could think of
games that I played that were similar. Rhythm games, games of coordination.
The game to the Mri is a form of literature.
It contains the relationships of the people.
And as such, I suppose that a great deal of it was made up completely out of whole cloth.
Because from simply the initial thought of a rhythm game, the original concept as I had it
was simply a rhythm or a
chant and beyond that the concept grew as my understanding of the Mri
increased just by working with that sort of culture until I began to realize
that if you're playing this thing um as dangerously as they play it, that it's
going to make a great deal of difference in terms of the weaknesses and
strengths of the players. It's going to have a great deal to say about the
interdependencies and independences, if you will, of the individuals within the
community. Who can play with whom? Who sets opposite whom? Who is allied to
whom? and it also has to do with the philosophy of the people which again has to
do with the great now the ability to turn loose of a thing and to live for the
moment which stretches in all directions in time to, as Niun puts it, open the
hand and let go which is one of the hardest things that Duncan has to learn
Okay one more question on those books It seemed to me that you did leave an
opening at the end of the third volume and I wanted to ask if you perhaps could
have any plans to continue with the Mri Yes there is a possibility of that I
had to work so intensely with that culture for quite a while that I do not at
present trust myself to tamper with it. I think that like the Morgaine books,
there is a possibility of my going back and working with it again. As a matter
of fact, I already have sort of the germ of an idea, but it will have to gather
moths for quite a while. I want to make sure that if I disturb them again, it's
for a worthy cause. And not just to write a book to be a sequel, but to be sure
that it is the kind of story that could only be told with the Mri. That's one
of the penalties of working with cultures. You lose the ability to say, well, I
would like to write a story, and I think I will write a story with these people.
When the story that I told is as wound as deeply into the culture and history of
a species as The Faded Sun was, you have to come up with another kind of story
which could only be told about that culture.
Okay, let me run to one more work. What was the impetus behind the short stories
in the book Sunfall? It's so different than the other things you've done. I
wondered what was behind that. Well, it's different perhaps than other things
which have come to light. But I think that I've traveled a great deal about the
world. I've been in... Well, let me think. I've been to Rome and to London. I've
never been in Paris, actually, but I've been all over France.
And... Istanbul, which didn't make it in. I was going to do an Istanbul story.
And yet... I've never been to Peking, either. But... And basically, I began
thinking about the organism of a city as an entity. The concept of a city having
a personality different than all other things. You go to New York, and you could
not mistake it for Rome. So just the composite of people living there gives it a
different flavor, a different taste, a different style than any other place.
Also, to a certain extent, I suppose it's psychologically related to the faded
sun because when I was thinking about another species at the end of time, I
wondered, what about our own? What about the earth when we're very, very old.
What sort of things might we preserve as our artifacts? And the idea occurred to
me that one of the things that humanity has created, which for all we know may
be unique to humanity, is this concept we call city. and consequently, the story
arose with the cities differentiating from each other to such an extent that we
return to the age of the city-state. Civilization is slowly being canceled just
because of the interval of distance and time and the difference of culture over
the years.
The idea behind that book would have been conceived before you wrote the short
stories or did you write the short stories individually and then sort of think
of a way to put them together? Well, actually, the initial story in the whole
piece was the Rome story. George Sithers, then with Isaac Asimov's magazines,
had shown me a cover which contained a fantastical number of elements and sort
of on a bad ask if I could write a short story based on that. Because back in
the old days, you know, writers did used to write stories to fit the covers
rather than the other way around. So I undertook it and George's comment on the
story was about that, that most editors make on my short stories, which was,
this seems to be connected to something else, probably the affliction of
novelists, you see. But I wrote that one and it lay about a while, and then, you
know, at the World Convention, they're always asking you to do readings from
your work, and I didn't have one. So I sat down and wrote The Only Death in the
City as sort of inspired the Rome story. And that one set in Paris so that I had
something to read at the World Convention, which I did. Then it suddenly struck
me that I had two stories which were obviously connected to something else. And
finally,
it dawned on me that I could do several more of them since they were of an
untidy length and actually have a book.
So out of all that broth of thinking about the world's old age and the character
of cities and the fact that I had two of them in hand, why I sat down and wrote
several of them right in a string, one after the other. Okay, I got the
impression of some of those stories, for instance the Paris one and the Moscow
one, that you may have consciously been modeling them on a folktale method. They
seem very much like a folktale or fairy tale to me almost. It wouldn't be
surprising because I've done a great deal of work in myth. I also personally
tend to believe that folktales are a fairly
accurate form of preserving the group consciousness of the people. You know, the
retellings of them through the centuries, everybody adds their own veneer, their
own layer of experience so that some of our very old stories acquire more and
more significance the older they get, Cinderella being a good case in point,
which has been changed in practically every century. It's been retold to fit the
current mythos. In the Paris one, I think that I was not consciously drawing on
any single fairy tale that I can think of, But in the Russian one, definitely, I
don't know, frankly, I don't know very much about Moscow. I literally had to
look up a city plan to find out what it was like. I had to look up about old
Moscow to see how far it stretched and probably what the first settlement was
and where the first building stood and why and all of this sort of thing. Once I
determined that, then I began thinking back on all the quintessential Russian
stories that I'd ever heard, most of which seemed to involve roles in one form
or another. I thought of the character of the land and I have studied Russian. I
have taken the Russian language so that I know something about the literature
and I know something about the inner relations of the words, what words and what
concepts are related to other words and what words are psychologically important
within the language. So I just stirred all that together and came out with the
Moscow story. Okay, one more observation, a question on that book. You didn't
have in mind any echo of the dying Earth, did you? Where the Earth is living its
last days and the various cultures on it are at their end? Well, I won't say
that I was unconscious of it. The Dying Earth is something I read so long ago
that I think that I'm almost ready to reread it as I do things which I enjoy a
great deal. Having forgotten some of the salient details of it so deeply that I
think that now again I can enjoy it as I did the first time, I do recall that I
liked it a great deal, but I cannot for the life of me remember exactly what
went on in it, which is the kind of reader I am. When I really am loving a book,
I begin to attempt to blur it in my mind and forget it as rapidly as possible so
that I can have the pleasure of rereading it within a year or so. Um, but, um, I
think that, um, some of the influences on, on my writing in later periods than
the first ones that I named, um, have been, um, um, Jack Vance and Fritz Leber
and, and so on. and I don't think that one can remain unaffected by those ideas.
Both of those writers have written on topics that I'm very fond of, which is the
urban community in fantasy. They're often, you know, fantasy pits one lone
barbarian wandering off across an icy landscape, coping with what comes. But the
urban community in fantasy is the province of those two writers in particular
that I think of at the moment, and definitely they have had their influence,
whether subconscious or direct. I did receive a very kind letter from Fritz
Leiber, who was kind enough to say that he had read Sunfall and we shared some
feelings for cities. Okay. One thing also that has impressed me a great deal
over the work that has been out that I've read of yours is the flexibility of
your style. And I wondered if you consciously work at a particular style for a
particular book. In other words, do you change it? Do you alter anything in
terms of the story and the kind of book you're writing? I suppose that that has
to do with being a bit of a linguist. There's also the fact that I have
to break myself of writing in dactylic hexameter. old Virgil students will know
what I mean. And in some books I do allow myself to slip into a little bit more
poetic style. It also seems to me that one's style should be appropriate to the
story that one is telling. So that if you're telling a story about nomads whose
very means of expression is going to be perhaps figurative and um poetical then
you can do this sort of thing in the faded sun for instance these styles vary
radically from chapter to chapter according to whether i happen to be dealing
with the the rather um um well the the nomadic uh culture of the murray or
whether i'm dealing with the humans who tend their narration background tends to
be much more uh uh stark and efficient I've worked in pure fantasy stories where
I've looked at the language myself and looked back on it and thought oh my
goodness I think I've been writing in rhythm again a habit of which I try to
cure myself because I do try to write prose um in Down Below Station style
varies again that is I think fairly bald, modern style. And I guess that I just
knew it as a part of the composition. For instance, if I were doing a portrait
as an artist of a Renaissance person, I think I would automatically tend to fall
into Renaissance style in my drawing and my painting rather than trying to to be
a cubist or a pointillist or whatever and it's the same way with my handling of
words if I'm talking on a subject that is itself old and my style is different
and one in which I'm talking about computers unless I'm making a point if I were
for instance talking about a computer as a vehicle of prophecy I might
deliberately fall back into an older mode of expression relating it back to
Delphi or something. While
I find that's one of the hardest things in the world in writing sequels is
because my mode of expression changes also with time. It's very, very difficult
for me to go back and to recapture the language of a particular book. I have to
reread it myself several times to fall back into that mode of expression. Yeah,
I would imagine I wouldn't be true. That sort of brings up another question I
was going to ask you. When you start to write a book, do you entirely plot the
thing out and have it fixed and then simply put it on paper, or do you just get
in the mood and just let it come out whenever it comes? There's only one book
that I've written straight through from beginning to end, well, maybe I did a
number of false starts. I have about 10 to 15 different beginnings for Gate of
Ivrel. After it gets beyond chapter five, then everything proceeds like a
straight line to the end. Many of the later chapters were written first draft,
which is very unusual for me. Eight drafts is not unusual in a book. um and the
paper I generate is really phenomenal I have filled a I could literally fill a
bushel basket with outtakes on most novels but the one that I did write
virtually from start to finish without a glitch was Wave Without a Shore that
one I just I started at chapter one Pardon me From chapter one To the very end
It was virtually All first draft Although I think I went through three And that
was it Most of the others I find that I don't even start At the beginning of the
book What is now chapter eight In The Faded Sun Started out as chapter one And
so on So like my literary idol Virgil, I tend to write in both directions at
once. I sort of begin at a point in action which makes sense to me, and then I
discover that I have to build back of that to explain how everybody got into the
situation that I visualized at the beginning.
Okay. I think I know the answer to this, or I could suspect it, but I'm going to
ask it anyhow. Now, your use of, when you set up an alien culture, the terms,
the language that you make up for it, for instance, in The Hunter of Worlds, I
think you did it more extensively there than most other places. Are you using
any kind of language structure or any kind of languages as a background for
that, or is it just your own knowledge of linguistics that allows you to make
that up? I consciously, I try to make it easy on the reader. Some readers, I
suppose, may deny this, but I truly do. I will, for instance, try to keep
related words
at least resembling one another closely enough that a person can figure out,
well, this is something to do with, say, love or fight, having seen a similar
configuration before, and if they miss it a little bit in terms of saying
romance versus combat or something like that. At least they're in the ballpark.
I do try to be kind also in not having words which aren't related starting with
the same letter. So I do some things which are designed for kindness to the
reader. Likewise, when I'm dealing with alien names, I try to avoid having two
or three aliens with very similar names.
which can be very, very confusing because there are many people who do not read
phonetically, and this could be a problem to them. So I'll try to have them
start at different points of the alphabet. Hunter of Worlds is constructed for
different reasons. Usually when I use alien languages in a book, it is not for
local color. It's just that when you run across anybody's civilization, which is
vastly different than your own, you're going to come across three or four words
which cannot be translated, no matter how you would like to. It's just that not
all languages have words for concepts.
Well, like in English, you can think of several things that you can say, that
you can't say in French, and vice versa, which is why language borrows words
from other languages. When I did Hunter at Worlds, I was doing something totally
different, and it is an experimental novel, and it is not a novel that I
recommend to someone who is not used to science fiction or not used to language,
one or the other. Basically on that one, the very premise of the book is
linguistics, treating the science of linguistics, if as you will as seriously as
you treat physics, in a science fiction novel. I deliberately set out to make a
language which is not based on any earthly model. I even changed the rules of
grammar to something that, as far as I know, is not directly based on any
grammatical system on the face of the earth. The thing is explained in an
appendix in the back for people who wish to do this kind of thing. and there are
several ways to read the book. The recommended one is as the viewpoint character
sees it. Frankly, the viewpoint character is confused Paul get out most of the
time. He doesn't understand. So you can equally well appreciate the book simply
by realizing that from his viewpoint, a lot of these people are speaking things
at him which he in no rise comprehends. The trouble with the book is that, of
course, at several points, he's vastly mistaken about what he thinks he
understands. So the book does have some pitfalls in it for somebody who is
accustomed to believing everything that the hero in a novel believes must ergo
be the truth, because he is very, very frequently mistaken or very, very
frequently picks up a concept which is not the whole concept and gradually
begins to arrive at an understanding of what's going on toward the end of the
book. But I must warn everyone that even at the end he is somewhat mistaken.
Yeah, that book did take a little more thought I think in work than some of the
others did. Let me change direction one more time. I don't know if you think
about, I'm sure you think about these things, but do you have a definition of
science fiction? I think the best one that ever came up was Roger Zelazny's
definition, at least I believe it is I don't know from whom he may have gotten
it but it's basically that if I ever discover a definition of science fiction I
shall immediately attempt to violate it science fiction to me is a will always
remain an experimental literature it does not have rules except to try to adhere
to science and to true things as much as possible and to try to have your
research well founded in at least the best possible understanding of what's
going on that you can arrive at. To me, science fiction is the same thing that
the unknown writer of the Gilgamesh epic did, a voyage in search of the unknown,
this sort of literature. It's the oldest kind of literature in the world.
frankly I view modern mainstream fiction as an aberration largely brought on by
culture shock with the advent of the machine age I think that it was sort of a
reaction by literary establishment that was not technologically educated and was
in many instances not equipped to understand what was going on in the world so
they retreated into a rather unrealistic form of literature, which really
attempted to either ignore the transformation that was taking place in human
society or having seen it or trying to deal with it could see no answer for it.
So my view of science fiction is that it is, that it is the cultural mainstream
of Western literature and Eastern literature as well, in many forms, and that
it's no different in spirit or in type than the old epics. Epics are essentially
literature of migration, and mankind is presently contemplating a rather large
one. Could you tell me what you think draws people to science fiction, why it's
so popular? I think the same thing that has always drawn people to all of the
aforementioned. It's curiosity. It's a wish to be in touch with one's
environment, one's real environment.
there are so many people who go through their daily lives concerned only with
what happens in the office and what happens around them. And it's sort of like
being locked in one cell if you never see beyond that. Nature and the universe
have so much more to it than what you perceive if you limit your vision to your
immediate time and your immediate place and your immediate circumstance.
There's a certain nobility in ordinary daily affairs. I do not deny that. But I
think that the real understanding of what actually goes on in those ordinary
daily affairs only comes through a wider understanding of the universe as a
whole. and this is what i think draws people to science fiction to fantasy to
uh... this whole vast realm of a romantical or positive way of of looking at the
universe which has been in the mainstream of the law that literature began okay
maybe you've answered this already maybe i'm just restating the question but let
me ask it Anyhow, do you think science fiction has a particular value for its
readers? I could not hear the last part of that question. Would you say that
science fiction had a particular value, or is it a valuable thing for its
readers? Yes, I would say that the value of science fiction is essentially the
broadening of vision. the broadening of vision in time because we do not really
concern ourselves only with the future. This is why fantasy, which deals with
past ages, has been quite as comfortable in associating with science fiction as
it has. On the one hand, it should seem very strange to find fantasy readers and
science fiction readers trading books, You'd think that we had nothing to say to
each other. But in point of fact, we have all the world to say to each other. We
have all of human experience to say to each other. We have the long view, one
sort of being the memory of mankind and the other being the hope and the
aspiration of where we will go and what we will do. Two sides of the same coin
are, as Cherryh would put it, a part of the great now. Uh, it's a, um, a kind of
literature that, uh, that widens the experience beyond one's daily life. Um, it
shows us the, the true size of the earth, the true size of the universe, uh, the
true importance of our troubles, um, both the size and complexity of them and
sometimes the extreme simplicity of them. it gives us perspective in dealing
with the world around us and with each other and shows us that we have in many
instances a good deal more in common than we do in difference
okay that's excellent thank you very much I don't have very much more to ask you
just a couple more yes are you drying out service on us? Are you okay on that
end? Yeah. Okay.
I guess really, sort of, well, okay, it's sort of a two-pronged question maybe.
I wonder which of your books are the most popular in terms of sales, you know,
your bestsellers, and also maybe in terms of fan response. It's very difficult
to judge this because I'm fairly young as a writer goes, My works have only been
out now for, what, six years, something like that. And sales figures are still
coming in. So the only thing I can tell you is that the oldest books have sold
the most. And there does seem, if you compared sales figures, to be some
acceleration in it. But also there must be a remarkable number of people that,
having read one, are going for the others. I hope that this is the case because
the sales figures seem to be remarkably similar.
In terms of, well, there's been some books that I've noticed that have caught on
a little more slowly, like Hunter. I think that perhaps it took a little bit of
readers getting used to me before they were ready to deal with Thunder of
Worlds. But in general, I would say that these sales have been fairly well even,
or if they were not even, they tend to become
more and more even,
which I think has also helped with the fact that all my books are in current
issue and if one likes one one can find the others so about the other it's kind
of curious again time plays a part in that the more game books the Gate trilogy
does attract a great deal of mail response, M-A-I-L, in the sense that possibly
because it is a Finnish story and there was a great deal of it and possibly
people spent a great deal of time with it. Also the fact that I think fantasy
people are great letter writers. i do um get quite a lot of um of mail on that
it also seems to provoke uh banish art um i've seen a great number of very
beautiful um renditions of the characters from that book which again may say
something about the uh you know what people's favorite may be um but then it's
got a lot of things that are really nice to draw, like horses and medieval armor
and this sort of thing.
I also get a great deal of mail about the Faded Sun Trilogy and a great deal of
interest in that one. So the two longer...